

THE DIP 

THE DIP
A LITTLE BOOK THAT TEACHES YOU
WHEN TO QUIT (AND WHEN TO STICK)

Seth Godin 

Illustrated by Hugh Macleod

PORTFOLIO 

PORTFOLIO

Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014,
U.S.A. • Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 • (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) •
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England • Penguin Ireland,
25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) •
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria
3124, Australia • (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) • Penguin
Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi–110
017, India • Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Mairangi Bay, Auckland
1311, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.) • Penguin Books
(South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196,
South Africa Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R
0RL, England Copyright © Do You Zoom, Inc., 2007
All rights reserved
Illustrations by Hugh MacLeod
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA
Godin, Seth.
 The dip : a little book that teaches you when to quit (and when to stick) / Seth
Godin; illustrated by Hugh Macleod.
 p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN: 978-1-1012-1634-7
 1.Self-actualization (Psychology). 2. Success. 3. Success in business.4.
Persistence. I. Title.
 BF637.S4G63 2007
 158.1—dc22 2006036366 Printed in the United States of America
Set in Janson Text with Berthold Akzidenz Grotesk Without limiting the rights
under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by
any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise),
without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above 
publisher of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by
law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not participate in
or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the
author’s rights is appreciated. 

For Helene 

THE DIP 

Contents

Being the Best in the World Is Seriously Underrated

If You’re Not Going to Get to #1, You Might as Well Quit Now.

The Best in the World?

Acknowledgments 
Being the Best in the World
Is Seriously Underrated 

I FEEL LIKE GIVING UP.

Almost every day, in fact. Not all day, of course, but there are moments.
My bet is that you have those moments, too. If you’re the kind of high-
achieving, goal-oriented person who finds herself reading a book like this,
you’re probably used to running into obstacles. Professional obstacles, personal
obstacles, even obstacles related to personal fitness or winning board games.

Most of the time, we deal with the obstacles by persevering. Sometimes we
get discouraged and turn to inspirational writing, like stuff from Vince
Lombardi: “Quitters never win and winners never quit.” Bad advice. Winners
quit all the time. They just quit the right stuff at the right time.

Most people quit. They just don’t quit successfully. In fact, many professions
and many marketplaces profit from quitters—society assumes you’re going to
quit. In fact, businesses and organizations count on it.

If you learn about the systems that have been put in place that encourage
quitting, you’ll be more likely to beat them. And once you understand the
common sinkhole that trips up so many people (I call it the Dip), you’ll be one
step closer to getting through it.

Extraordinary benefits accrue to the tiny minority of people who are able to

push just a tiny bit longer than most.

Extraordinary benefits also accrue to the tiny majority with the guts to quit

early and refocus their efforts on something new.
 

In both cases, it’s about being the best in the world. About getting through

the hard stuff and coming out on the other side.

Quit the wrong stuff.

Stick with the right stuff.

Have the guts to do one or the other.

The Best in the World
Hannah Smith is a very lucky woman. She’s a law clerk at the Supreme Court.
She’s the best in the world.

Last year, more than forty-two thousand people graduated from law school
in the United States. And thirty-seven of them were awarded Supreme Court
clerkships.
Those thirty-seven people are essentially guaranteed a job for life after they
finish their year with the Court. Top law firms routinely pay a signing bonus of
$200,000 or more to any clerk they are able to hire. Clerks go on to become
partners, judges, and senators.

There are two things worth noting here. The first is that Hannah Smith isn’t

lucky at all. She’s smart and focused and incredibly hardworking.
And the second thing? That any one of the forty-two thousand people who
graduated from law school last year could have had Hannah’s job. Except they
didn’t. Not because they weren’t smart enough or because they came from the
wrong family. No, the reason that most of them didn’t have a chance is that
somewhere along the way they quit. They didn’t quit high school or college or
law school. Instead, they quit in their quest to be the best in the world because
the cost just seemed too high.

This is a very short book about a very important topic: quitting. Believe it or

not, quitting is often a great strategy, a smart way to manage your life and your

 
career. Sometimes, though, quitting is exactly the wrong thing to do. It turns out
that there’s a pretty simple way to tell the difference.
In addition to being smart and focused and incredibly hardworking, Hannah
Smith is also a quitter. In order to get as far as she’s gotten, she’s quit countless
other pursuits. You really can’t try to do everything, especially if you intend to
be the best in the world.

Before we start on the quitting, though, you probably need to be sold on why

being the best in the world matters so much.
The Surprising Value of Being
the Best in the World
Our culture celebrates superstars. We reward the product or the song or the
organization or the employee that is number one. The rewards are heavily
skewed, so much so that it’s typical for #1 to get ten times the benefit of #10,
and a hundred times the benefit of #100.

According to the International Ice Cream Association, these are the top ten

flavors of ice cream:
 

Vanilla 

Chocolate 

Butter Pecan 

Strawberry

Neapolitan 

Chocolate Chip 

French Vanilla

Cookies ’n’ Cream
 

Fudge Ripple 

Praline

You’d be forgiven if you assumed, as you assume with most lists, that the
top-ranked flavors did a little bit better than the others. But here’s what the
distribution really looked like:

It’s always like this (almost always, anyway). It’s called Zipf’s law, and it
applies to résumés and college application rates and best-selling records and
everything in between. Winners win big because the marketplace loves a winner.

Here’s another example; these are box-office rankings from a particularly

bad week at the movies in August 2006:

Invincible

Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby

Little Miss Sunshine

Beerfest

 

World Trade Center

Accepted

Snakes on a Plane

Step Up

Idlewild

Barnyard

It’s hard to feel sorry for the horrible movie Beerfest. After all, it came in

fourth. But look at the chart of actual revenue:
If you’ve read Chris Anderson’s The Long Tail, this isn’t news to you. But I
don’t care about the long tail right now—I want to show you the short head. The
short, big, profitable head. That’s the juicy share of the market that belongs to
the people at the top of the list.

The Reason Number One Matters
People don’t have a lot of time and don’t want to take a lot of risks. If you’ve
been diagnosed with cancer of the navel, you’re not going to mess around by
going to a lot of doctors. You’re going to head straight for the “top guy,” the
 
person who’s ranked the best in the world. Why screw around if you get only
one chance?

When you visit a new town, are you the sort of person who wants to visit a

typical restaurant, or do you ask the concierge for the best place?

When you’re hiring someone for your team, do you ask your admin to give
you the average résumé, or do you ask him to screen out all but the very best
qualified people?

With limited time or opportunity to experiment, we intentionally narrow our

choices to those at the top.
You’re not the only person who looks for the best choice. Everyone does. As
a result, the rewards for being first are enormous. It’s not a linear scale. It’s not a
matter of getting a little more after giving a little more. It’s a curve, and a steep
one.

The (Real) Reason Number One Matters
The second reason there are such tremendous benefits to being number one is a
little more subtle. Being at the top matters because there’s room at the top for
only a few. Scarcity makes being at the top worth something. There are hundreds
of brands of bottled water, and they’re all mostly the same. So we don’t shop
around for bottled water. There is no top for bottled water. Champagne is a
different story. Dom Pérignon is at or near the top, so we pay extra for it.
Where does the scarcity come from? It comes from the hurdles that the
markets and our society set up. It comes from the fact that most competitors quit
long before they’ve created something that makes it to the top. That’s the way
it’s supposed to be. The system depends on it.

The Best in the World?
Anyone who is going to hire you, buy from you, recommend you, vote for you,
or do what you want them to do is going to wonder if you’re the best choice.
Best as in: best for them, right now, based on what they believe and what
they know. And in the world as in: their world, the world they have access to. 
So if I’m looking for a freelance copy editor, I want the best copy editor in
English, who’s available, who can find a way to work with me at a price I can
afford. That’s my best in the world. If I want a hernia doctor, I want the doctor
who is best because she’s recommended by my friends or colleagues and
because she fits my picture of what a great doctor is. That, and she has to be in
my town and have a slot open. So world is a pretty flexible term.
The mass market is dying. There is no longer one best song or one best kind
of coffee. Now there are a million micromarkets, but each micromarket still has
a best. If your micromarket is “organic markets in Tulsa,” then that’s your world.
And being the best in that world is the place to be.
Best is subjective. I (the consumer) get to decide, not you. World is selfish.
It’s my definition, not yours. It’s the world I define, based on my convenience or
my preferences. Be the best in my world and you have me, at a premium, right
now.

The world is getting larger because I can now look everywhere when I want
to find something (or someone). That means that the amount of variety is
staggering, and it means I can define my world to be exactly what I have an
interest in—and find my preferences anywhere on the planet.
At the same time, the world is getting smaller because the categories are
getting more specialized. I can now find the best gluten-free bialys available by
overnight shipping. I can find the best risk-management software for my
industry, right now, online. I can find the best clothing-optional resort in North
America with six clicks of a mouse. So while it’s more important than ever to be
the best in the world, it’s also easier—if you pick the right thing and do it all the
way. More places to win, and the stakes are higher, too.

Andy Warhol was the best in the world. So is the Sripraphai Thai restaurant
in Queens. So is my editor. So are you, if you want to be. If you’re not sold on
being the best in the world, you probably don’t need the rest of what I’m about
to tell you. But if you’re sold on being the best, but you’ve been frustrated in the
route you’re taking to get there, then you need to start doing some quitting.

The Infinity Problem

The problem with infinity is that there’s too much of it. 
And in just about every market, the number of choices is approaching
infinity. Faced with infinity, people panic. Sometimes they don’t buy anything.
Sometimes they buy the cheapest one of whatever they’re shopping for. Faced
with an infinite number of choices, many people pick the market leader. Best-
selling books still outsell backlist titles. Web sites highlighted on Digg still get a
hundred times as much traffic as ordinary sites. Big insurance companies get
clients just because they’re big.
The number of job seekers is approaching infinity. So is the number of
professional services firms, lawyers, manicure shops, coffee bars, and brands of
soap. Better to be the best.

Is That the Best You Can Do?
Job applications in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS. Junk mail with a misspelled
name. Salespeople who are eager to open an account, but never follow up.
Doctors that don’t bother to call to see if a new medication worked for a long-
time patient. People settle. They settle for less than they are capable of.
Organizations settle too. For good enough instead of best in the world.

If you’re not going to put in the effort to be my best possible choice, why

bother?

Is “Well, no one better showed up” a valid strategy for success? Are you

hoping to become a success because you’re the only one being considered? 

The reason that big companies almost always fail when they try to enter new
markets is their willingness to compromise. They figure that because they are
big and powerful, they can settle, do less, stop improving something before it is
truly remarkable. They compromise to avoid offending other divisions or to
minimize their exposure. So they fail. They fail because they don’t know when
to quit and when to refuse to settle.

The Biggest Mistake They Made in School
Just about everything you learned in school about life is wrong, but the wrongest
thing might very well be this: Being well rounded is the secret to success.
When you came home from school with two As, a B+, and three Bs, you
were doing just fine. Imagine the poor kid who had an A+ and four Cs. Boy, was
he in trouble.
Fast-forward a few decades from those school days, and think about the
decisions you make today—about which doctor to pick, which restaurant to visit,
or which accountant to hire. How often do you look for someone who is actually
quite good at the things you don’t need her to do? How often do you hope that
your accountant is a safe driver and a decent golfer?

In a free market, we reward the exceptional.

In school, we tell kids that once something gets too hard, move on and focus
on the next thing. The low-hanging fruit is there to be taken; no sense wasting
time climbing the tree.

From a test-taking book: “Skim through the questions and answer the easiest
ones first, skipping ones you don’t know immediately.” Bad advice. Superstars
can’t skip the ones they don’t know. In fact, the people who are the best in the
world specialize at getting really good at the questions they don’t know. The
people who skip the hard questions are in the majority, but they are not in
demand.
Many organizations make sure they’ve dotted all their i’s—they have
customer service, a receptionist, a convenient location, a brochure, and on and
on—and all of it is mediocre. More often than not, prospects choose someone
else—their competition. Those competitors can’t perform in some areas, but 

they’re exceptional in the ones that matter.

The Magic of Thinking Quit
Twenty years ago, I read a book that changed my life. It was called The Magic of
Thinking Big. I actually don’t remember anything about the book at all. What I
do remember is that in one quick moment, it changed the way I thought about
success.

My hope is that the next page or two might do the same for you. I want to

change the way you think about success (and quitting).
Most people will tell you that you need to persevere—to try harder, put in
more hours, get more training, and work hard. “Don’t quit!” they implore. But if
all you need to do to succeed is not quit, then why do organizations less
motivated than yours succeed? Why do individuals less talented than you win?

It involves understanding the architecture of quitting, and, believe it or not, it

means quitting a lot more than you do now.

Strategic quitting is the secret of successful organizations. Reactive quitting
and serial quitting are the bane of those that strive (and fail) to get what they
want. And most people do just that. They quit when it’s painful and stick when
they can’t be bothered to quit.

There are two curves that define almost any type of situation facing you as
you try to accomplish something. (A couple of minor curves cover the rest.)
Understanding the different types of situations that lead you to quit—or that
should cause you to quit—is the first step toward getting what you want.

CURVE 1: THE DIP

Almost everything in life worth doing is controlled by the Dip. 
At the beginning, when you first start something, it’s fun. You could be
taking up golf or acupuncture or piloting a plane or doing chemistry—doesn’t
matter; it’s interesting, and you get plenty of good feedback from the people
around you.

Over the next few days and weeks, the rapid learning you experience keeps

you going. Whatever your new thing is, it’s easy to stay engaged in it.

And then the Dip happens.
The Dip is the long slog between starting and mastery. A long slog that’s
actually a shortcut, because it gets you where you want to go faster than any
other path.

The Dip is the combination of bureaucracy and busywork you must deal

with in order to get certified in scuba diving.

The Dip is the difference between the easy “beginner” technique and the

more useful “expert” approach in skiing or fashion design.

The Dip is the long stretch between beginner’s luck and real

accomplishment.

The Dip is the set of artificial screens set up to keep people like you out.

If you took organic chemistry in college, you’ve experienced the Dip.
Academia doesn’t want too many unmotivated people to attempt medical school,
so they set up a screen. Organic chemistry is the killer class, the screen that
separates the doctors from the psychologists. If you can’t handle organic 

chemistry, well, then, you can’t go to med school.

At the beginning, when you announce that you’re premed, you get all sorts
of positive feedback and support. Your grandmother can’t believe her good
fortune! But soon, the incredible grind of organic chemistry kicks in, and you
realize you’re doomed.
At trade shows, you see dozens of companies trying to break into an
industry. They’ve invested time and money to build a product, to create a
marketing organization and rent booth space—all in an attempt to break into a
lucrative market. A year later, most of them don’t return. They’re gone, unable to
get through the Dip.

The same thing happens to people who dream of the untold riches and power
that accrue to the CEO of a Fortune 500 company. Private jets, fancy country
clubs, unchecked decision-making power. Who wouldn’t want to live like
modern-day royalty? Of course, if you look at the résumé of a typical CEO,
you’ll see that he endured a twenty-five-year Dip before landing the job. For a
quarter of a century, he needed to suck it up, keep his head down, and do what he
was told. He needed to hit his numbers, work longer hours than everyone else,
and kiss up to his boss of the moment. Day in and day out, year after year.

It’s easy to be a CEO. What’s hard is getting there. There’s a huge Dip along
the way. If it was easy, there’d be too many people vying for the job and the
CEOs couldn’t get paid as much, could they? Scarcity, as we’ve seen, is the
secret to value. If there wasn’t a Dip, there’d be no scarcity.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Successful people don’t just ride out the Dip. They
don’t just buckle down and survive it. No, they lean into the Dip. They push
harder, changing the rules as they go. Just because you know you’re in the Dip
doesn’t mean you have to live happily with it. Dips don’t last quite as long when
you whittle at them.

CURVE 2: THE CUL-DE-SAC
The Cul-de-Sac (French for “dead end”) is so simple it doesn’t even need a
chart. It’s a situation where you work and you work and you work and nothing
much changes. It doesn’t get a lot better, it doesn’t get a lot worse. It just is. 

That’s why they call those jobs dead-end jobs.

There’s not a lot to say about the Cul-de-Sac except to realize that it exists
and to embrace the fact that when you find one, you need to get off it, fast.
That’s because a dead end is keeping you from doing something else. The
opportunity cost of investing your life in something that’s not going to get better
is just too high.

That’s it. Two big curves (a bonus, the Cliff, follows). Stick with the Dips
that are likely to pan out, and quit the Cul-de-Sacs to focus your resources.
That’s it.

CURVE 3: THE CLIFF (RARE BUT SCARY)
Cigarettes, it turns out, were redesigned by scientists to be particularly addictive.
If you were going to draw a chart of the pleasure of smoking over time, it would
look like this:

Except for that nasty drop-off at the end (otherwise known as emphysema),
smoking is a marketer’s dream come true. Because smoking is designed to be
almost impossible to quit, the longer you do it, the better it feels to continue
smoking. The pain of quitting just gets bigger and bigger over time. I call this
curve a Cliff—it’s a situation where you can’t quit until you fall off, and the
whole thing falls apart.

It’s no wonder that people have trouble stopping. 

The thing is, a profession in selling isn’t like smoking cigarettes. Neither is
making it as a singer or building a long-term relationship with someone you care
about. Most of the time, the other two curves are in force. The Dip and the Cul-
de-Sac aren’t linear. They don’t spoon feed you with little bits of improvement
every day. And they’re just waiting to trip you up.

If It Is Worth Doing, There’s Probably a Dip
Tennis has a Dip. The difference between a mediocre club player and a regional
champion isn’t inborn talent—it’s the ability to push through the moments where
it’s just easier to quit. Politics has a Dip as well—it’s way more fun to win an
election than to lose one, and the entire process is built around many people
starting while most people quit.

The Dip creates scarcity; scarcity creates value.

The Cul-de-Sac and the Cliff Are the Curves That Lead to Failure
If you find yourself facing either of these two curves, you need to quit. Not soon,
but right now. The biggest obstacle to success in life, as far as I can tell, is our
inability to quit these curves soon enough.

It’s easy to complain that the advice in this little book is brain-dead obvious.

I mean, who doesn’t already know that the secret to success is to be successful, 
that providing a great product or service is the right thing to do, and that you
shouldn’t quit in the face of adversity?

You don’t. That’s the bad news. The good news is that your boss and your

competitors don’t know either.

I mean, you know it, but my guess is that you’re not doing anything about it.
When it comes right down to it, right down to the hard decisions, are you
quitting any project that isn’t a Dip? Or is it just easier not to rock the boat, to
hang in there, to avoid the short-term hassle of changing paths? What’s the point
of sticking it out if you’re not going to get the benefits of being the best in the
world? Are you overinvesting (really significantly overinvesting) time and
money so that you have a much greater chance of dominating a market? And if
you don’t have enough time and money, do you have the guts to pick a different,
smaller market to conquer?

Once you’re doing those things, then you get it.

The Dip Is Where Success Happens
If you haven’t already realized it, the Dip is the secret to your success. The
people who set out to make it through the Dip—the people who invest the time
and the energy and the effort to power through the Dip—those are the ones who
become the best in the world. They are breaking the system because, instead of
moving on to the next thing, instead of doing slightly above average and settling
for what they’ve got, they embrace the challenge. For whatever reason, they
refuse to abandon the quest and they push through the Dip all the way to the next
level.

Snowboarding is a hip sport. It’s fast, exciting, and reasonably priced; and it
makes you look very cool. So why are there so few snowboarders? Because
learning the basic skills constitutes a painful Dip. It takes a few days to get the
hang of it, and, during those few days, you’ll get pretty banged up. It’s easier to
quit than it is to keep going.

The brave thing to do is to tough it out and end up on the other side—getting
all the benefits that come from scarcity. The mature thing is not even to bother
starting to snowboard because you’re probably not going to make it through the
Dip. And the stupid thing to do is to start, give it your best shot, waste a lot of 

time and money, and quit right in the middle of the Dip.
A few people will choose to do the brave thing and end up the best in the
world. Informed people will probably choose to do the mature thing and save
their resources for a project they’re truly passionate about. Both are fine choices.
It’s the last choice, the common choice, the choice to give it a shot and then quit
that you must avoid if you want to succeed.

What Butch Knew
When Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid were being chased across the
Badlands by Charlie Siringo and agents from Pinkerton’s, Butch kept heading
for the hills, for tougher and tougher terrain. Why? Because he knew that in open
country, he and Sundance would never have a shot at escape. Only if they got
through the impassable hills ahead would there be a chance that the Pinkerton’s
guys would quit. The harder it got, the better it was for Butch.

But the Pinkerton’s posse persisted. It wasn’t until Butch and Sundance
faced certain death that they escaped. Hey, it worked in the movie. Your
marketplace is competitive, filled with people overcoming challenges every day.
It’s the incredibly difficult challenges (the Dips) that give you the opportunity to
pull ahead.
In a competitive world, adversity is your ally. The harder it gets, the better
chance you have of insulating yourself from the competition. If that adversity 

also causes you to quit, though, it’s all for nothing.

What Jack Knew
When Jack Welch remade GE, the most fabled decision he made was this: If we
can’t be #1 or #2 in an industry, we must get out.
Why sell a billion-dollar division that’s making a profit quite happily while
ranking #4 in market share? Easy. Because it distracts management attention. It
sucks resources and capital and focus and energy. And most of all, it teaches
people in the organization that it’s okay not to be the best in the world.

Jack quit the dead ends. By doing so, he freed resources to get his other

businesses through the Dip.

The Thing About the Wind

I can tell you that windsurfing is very easy—except for the wind.
The wind makes it tricky, of course. It’s not particularly difficult to find and
rent great equipment, and the techniques are fairly straightforward. What messes
the whole plan up is the fact that the wind is unpredictable. It’ll change exactly
when you don’t want it to.
The same thing is true about customer service (it would be a lot easier if it
weren’t for the customers). In fact, every single function of an organization has a
wind problem.
Accounting would be easy if every incoming report were accurate and on
time. Sales would be easy if it weren’t for the prospects not buying from you all
the time. Marketing would be easy if every prospect and customer thought the
way you do.
Here’s the good news: The fact that it’s difficult and unpredictable works to
your advantage. Because if it were any other way, there’d be no profit in it. The
reason people bother to go windsurfing is that the challenge makes it interesting.
The driving force that gets people to pay a specialist is that their disease is
unpredictable or hard to diagnose. The reason we’re here is to solve the hard
problems. 
The next time you’re tempted to vilify a particularly obnoxious customer or
agency or search engine, realize that this failed interaction is the best thing that’s
happened to you all day long. Without it, you’d be easily replaceable. The Dip is
your very best friend.

The Reason We’re Here
If I could offer just one piece of inspiration, it’s this: The Dip is the reason
you’re here. Whether you’re lifting weights or negotiating a sale or applying for
a job or lunging for a tennis ball, you’ve made a huge investment. You’ve
invested time and money and effort to get to this moment. You’ve acquired the
equipment and the education and the reputation…all so you can confront this
Dip, right now.

The Dip is the reason you’re here.
It’s not enough to survive your way through this Dip. You get what you
deserve when you embrace the Dip and treat it like the opportunity that it really
is.
The Lie of Diversification—
What Woodpeckers Know
When faced with the Dip, many individuals and organizations diversify. If you
can’t get to the next level, the thinking goes, invest your energy in learning to do
something else. This leads to record labels with thousands of artists instead of
focused promotion for just a few. It leads to job seekers who can demonstrate
competency at a dozen tasks instead of mastery of just one.

Hardworking, motivated people find diversification a natural outlet for their
energy and drive. Diversification feels like the right thing to do. Enter a new
market, apply for a job in a new area, start a new sport. Who knows? This might
just be the one. 

And yet the real success goes to those who obsess. The focus that leads you
through the Dip to the other side is rewarded by a marketplace in search of the
best in the world.

A woodpecker can tap twenty times on a thousand trees and get nowhere, but

stay busy. Or he can tap twenty-thousand times on one tree and get dinner.

Before you enter a new market, consider what would happen if you managed

to get through the Dip and win in the market you’re already in.

Most People Are Afraid to Quit

It’s easier to be mediocre than it is to confront reality and quit.
Quitting is difficult. Quitting requires you to acknowledge that you’re never
going to be #1 in the world. At least not at this. So it’s easier just to put it off, not
admit it, settle for mediocre.

What a waste.

You Should Be Angry Now…
I know that I am. I’m angry at all the worthwhile organizations that stick with a
Cul-de-Sac instead of leaving it and investing their resources where they belong.
I’m angry at all the people who have wasted time and money trying to get
through a Dip that they should have realized was too big and too deep to get 
through with the resources they had available. Mostly I’m angry that it took me
this long to be able to describe how simple the solution is.

How Arnold Beat the Dip
The essential thing to know about the Dip is that it’s there. Knowing that you’re
facing a Dip is the first step in getting through it.

Every time Men’s Health puts a picture of a guy with washboard abs on their
cover, newsstand sales go up. Why? Well, if everyone had washboard abs, it’s
unlikely that men would buy a magazine that teaches them how to get that
physique.

The very scarcity of this attribute makes it attractive.
Weight training is a fascinating science. Basically, you do a minute or two of
work for no reason other than to tire out your muscle so that the last few seconds
of work will cause that muscle to grow.

Like most people, all day long, every day, you use your muscles. But they
don’t grow. You don’t look like Mr. Universe because you quit using your
muscles before you reach the moment where the stress causes them to start
growing. It’s the natural thing to do, because an exhausted muscle feels unsafe—
and it hurts.

People who train successfully pay their dues for the first minute or two and
then get all the benefits at the very end. Unsuccessful trainers pay exactly the
same dues but stop a few seconds too early.

It’s human nature to quit when it hurts. But it’s that reflex that creates

scarcity.

The challenge is simple: Quitting when you hit the Dip is a bad idea. If the
journey you started was worth doing, then quitting when you hit the Dip just
wastes the time you’ve already invested. Quit in the Dip often enough and you’ll
find yourself becoming a serial quitter, starting many things but accomplishing
little.

Simple: If you can’t make it through the Dip, don’t start. 

If you can embrace that simple rule, you’ll be a lot choosier about which

journeys you start.

Superstar Thinking
Superstars get what they want because they have unique skills. Superstars
command far more than their fair share of income, respect, and opportunity
because there are very few other choices for a customer or an employer seeking
the extraordinary.
A superstar real estate agent gets five or ten times the number of listings as
an ordinary one. A superstar lawyer has all the work she can handle, regardless
of her specialty. A superstar musician commands a thousand times the income
per performance as an average musician. A superstar is the best in the world at
what she does.
If you want to be a superstar, then you need to find a field with a steep Dip
—a barrier between those who try and those who succeed. And you’ve got to get
through that Dip to the other side. This isn’t for everyone. If it were, there’d be
no superstars. If you choose this path, it’s because you realize that there’s a Dip,
and you believe you can get through it. The Dip is actually your greatest ally
because it makes the project worthwhile (and keeps others from competing with
you).
But wait, that’s not enough. Not only do you need to find a Dip that you can
conquer but you also need to quit all the Cul-de-Sacs that you’re currently idling
your way through. You must quit the projects and investments and endeavors
that don’t offer you the same opportunity. It’s difficult, but it’s vitally important.
Being better than 98 percent of the competition used to be fine. In the world
of Google, though, it’s useless. It’s useless because all of your competition is just
a click away, whatever it is you do. The only position you can count on now is
best in the world.
Seven Reasons You Might Fail to Become
the Best in the World

You run out of time (and quit). 

You run out of money (and quit).

You get scared (and quit).

You’re not serious about it (and quit).

You lose interest or enthusiasm or settle for being mediocre (and quit).

You focus on the short term instead of the long (and quit when the short term

gets too hard).

You pick the wrong thing at which to be the best in the world (because you

don’t have the talent).
By “you” I mean your team, your company, or just plain you, the job seeker,
the employee, or the entrepreneur. The important thing to remember about these
seven things is that you can plan for them. You can know before you start
whether or not you have the resources and the will to get to the end. Most of the
time, if you fail to become the best in the world, it’s either because you planned
wrong or because you gave up before you reached your goal.
Is it possible that you’re just not good enough? That you (or your team) just
don’t have enough talent to be the best in the world? Sure it’s possible. In fact, if
your chosen area is the cello, or speed skating, then I might even say it’s
probable. But in just about every relevant area I can think of, no, it’s not likely.
You are good enough. The question is, will you take the shortcut you need to get
really good at this?

Why Is the Curve with a Dip so Prevalent?
One of the underpinnings of the Dip is the pyramid. A pyramid scheme is a scam
in which the people at the bottom support the guy at the top. But it’s not always a
scam. In fact, it happens a lot more than you realize.

For example, lots of people sign up for a health-club membership (having a
lot of members lets the club keep rates reasonable), but the club itself is small
because very few people actually come frequently after they join. That’s built
into the system. If everyone who joined came, you’d never be able to find an 

empty bike or to afford a membership.
Netflix gives you an unlimited number of DVD rentals a month, postage
paid, for $10. How can this be? If you watched a movie the day it came in and
sent it right back, you’d get to see at least six movies for $10. Of course, the key
is that for every person who sees six, there are plenty of people who lose interest
and see one movie, or even no movies, a month. These people subsidize the
committed members. Sure, Netflix wants you to see a lot of movies—that makes
you a loyal customer. But the economics of the entire business would fall apart if
it weren’t for the uncommitted users who just dabble.

For a long time, airlines oversold their flights because they knew they would

profit from the no-shows.
Politicians fully expect that the lazy and ill-informed won’t bother to vote.
These citizens pay taxes, which support the political life of the few who don’t
quit the system.

And, of course, the entire college-football money machine is based on a

pyramid scheme of players who aspire to the NFL but will never make it.
Whatever you do for a living, or for fun, it’s probably somehow based on a
system that’s based on quitting. Quitting creates scarcity; scarcity creates value.

In The Wizard of Oz, there’s an indelible image of the man behind the

curtain, laughing at Dorothy and her friends as he gives them incredibly difficult, 
almost impossible tasks to accomplish. While he lives the easy life in Oz, he
supports himself by sending his acolytes off on impossible missions.

It’s no wonder we quit. The system wants us to.

Eight Dip Curves
Here are a bunch of systems that are dependent on Dips. These Dips are in the
places where organizations and individuals are most likely to give up. If you see
these Dips coming, you’re more likely to make a choice. You can choose (in
advance) to do whatever you need to do in order to get through the Dip, knowing
it’s going to be difficult; or you can give up before you get there. Quitting in the
Dip, though, isn’t worth the journey.
MANUFACTURING DIP—It’s easy and fun to start building something in
your garage. It’s difficult and expensive to buy an injection mold, design an
integrated circuit, or ramp up for large-scale production. The time and effort and
cost of ramping up your operation create the Dip. The Dip keeps the supply of
stuff down and insulates those brave enough to invest in scaling up their
production. Those struggling artists at the local craft fair are struggling because
they don’t have the guts or the wherewithal to take their work to the next level.
SALES DIP—Most ideas get their start when one person—you—starts selling
it. Selling the idea to stores or to businesses or to consumers or even to voters.
But the Dip hits when you need to upgrade to a professional sales force and scale
it up. In almost every field, the competitor that’s first with a big, aggressive sales
force has a huge advantage.
EDUCATION DIP—A career gets started as soon as you leave school. But the
Dip often hits when it’s time to go learn something new, to reinvent or rebuild
your skills. A doctor who sacrifices a year of her life for a specialty reaps the
rewards for decades afterward.
RISK DIP—Bootstrappers learn the hard way that at some point they can’t pay
for it all themselves, especially out of current income. It takes a risk to rent a 
bigger space or invest in new techniques. Successful entrepreneurs understand
the difference between investing to get through the Dip (a smart move) or
investing in something that’s actually a risky crapshoot.
RELATIONSHIP DIP—There are people and organizations that can help you
later but only if you invest the time and effort to work with them now, even
though now is not necessarily the easy time for you to do it. That kid who started
in the mail room—who was always eager to do an errand for you or stay late to
help out—she’s now the CEO. The relationships she built when it was difficult
to do so paid off later. Those shortsighted people who are always eager for a
favor or a break never manage to get through the relationship Dip, because they
didn’t invest in relationships back when it was difficult (but not urgent).
CONCEPTUAL DIP—You got this far operating under one set of assumptions.
Abandoning those assumptions and embracing a new, bigger set may be exactly
what you need to do to get to the next level. The heroes who have reinvented
institutions and industries (everyone from Martin Luther King, Jr., to Richard
Branson, from Zelma Watson George to Jacqueline Novogratz) all did it in
exactly the same way—by working through a conceptual Dip all the way to the
other side.
EGO DIP—When it’s all about you, it’s easier. Giving up control and leaning
into the organization gives you leverage. Most people can’t do this; they can’t
give up control or the spotlight. They get stuck in that Dip.
DISTRIBUTION DIP—Some retailers (local strip malls, the Web) make it easy
for your product to get distribution, while others (Target) require an investment
from your organization that may just pay off. Getting your product into Wal-
Mart is far more likely to lead to huge sales than is putting it on the Web. Why?
Scarcity. Everyone is on the Web, but getting into Wal-Mart is hard.

Seeing the Curve in Advance

As you’ll see in the space-shuttle analysis that follows, it’s pretty easy to 
determine whether something is a Cul-de-Sac or a Dip. The hard part is finding
the guts to do something about it. Optimistic entrepreneurs and employees who
blithely wander into a serious business, totally out-gunned and unprepared to
work their way through the Dip ahead, are in danger of building a space shuttle.

There’s nothing wrong with optimism. The pain (and the waste) comes when

the optimists have to make hard choices when they get stuck in the Dip.

Time to Cancel the Space Shuttle
The space shuttle is a Cul-de-Sac, not a Dip. When pundits argue in favor of the
shuttle, they don’t say, “We should keep doing this because it’s going to get
safer/cheaper/more productive over time.” The only reason the shuttle still exists
is that no one has the guts to cancel it. There’s no reason to keep investing in
something that is not going to get better.

In fact, if we canceled the shuttle, we’d create an urgent need for a
replacement. The lack of a way to get to space would force us to invent a new,
better, cheaper alternative.

So why don’t we cancel it? Why not quit? Same reason as always. Because
day to day, it’s easier to stick with something that we’re used to, that doesn’t
make too many waves, that doesn’t hurt.

As the Declaration of Independence warns us, “all experience hath shewn

that mankind are more disposed to suffer,

while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms

to which they are accustomed.”

Do you have the guts to quit when facing a Cul-de-Sac?

The Valley of Death
That’s the goal of any competitor: to create a Dip so long and so deep that the
nascent competition can’t catch up.
Microsoft does it. They’ve built so many relationships and established so
many standards that it’s essentially inconceivable that someone will challenge 
Word or Excel—at least until the platform changes. Intuit made it through the
Dip, though, and now their Quicken accounting software is just as secure as
Word is as a word processor. Make it through the competition’s barriers and you
get to be king for a while.

“But wait!” you say. “Isn’t Google going hard after Microsoft by creating
Web-based versions of spreadsheets and word processors?” Yes. But even
mighty Google knows that they can’t do that without changing the platform
(from the PC to the Web). Microsoft has constructed a Dip so deep and so
expensive that it’s impossible to cross. But now, with a new platform, Google
has a much easier path to follow.
Apple’s done the same thing with iTunes and the iPod. First, they took
advantage of a new platform to destroy the Tower Records of the world. Then,
instead of resting on their lead, Apple built all sorts of systems and benefits that
make it extremely difficult for someone to persevere long enough to come out
ahead at the other end.

Professions do it as well. Lawyers, for example, have continually increased
how difficult it is to pass the bar exam, lengthening the Dip and making life
better on the other side for everyone who is already a lawyer.

The Big Opportunity
If you can get through the Dip, if you can keep going when the system is
expecting you to stop, you will achieve extraordinary results. People who make
it through the Dip are scarce indeed, so they generate more value.

When you’re the best in the world, you share the benefits (the income, the
attention, the privileges, the respect) with just a handful of people or
organizations or brands. That male magazine model with the great abs gets work
precisely because so many people have quit in their quest to get what he’s got.

You know this already. You’re not stupid, and you’ve noticed all your life
that the big benefits accrue to those who don’t quit. And it hasn’t made a
difference so far, so why should you listen to me now?
Simple. It’s about the story you tell yourself. You grew up believing that
quitting is a moral failing. Quitting feels like a go-down moment, a moment 
where you look yourself in the eye and blink. Of course you are trying your best.
But you just can’t do it. It’s that whole Vince Lombardi thing. If you were just a
better person, you wouldn’t quit.
I’d rather have you focus on quitting (or not quitting) as a go-up opportunity.
It’s not about avoiding the humiliation of failure. Even more important, you can
realize that quitting the stuff you don’t care about or the stuff you’re mediocre at
or better yet quitting the Cul-de-Sacs frees up your resources to obsess about the
Dips that matter.

If you’re going to quit, quit before you start. Reject the system. Don’t play

the game if you realize you can’t be the best in the world.

Average Is for Losers
Quitting at the right time is difficult. Most of us don’t have the guts to quit.
Worse, when faced with the Dip, sometimes we don’t quit. Instead, we get
mediocre.
The most common response to the Dip is to play it safe. To do ordinary
work, blameless work, work that’s beyond reproach. When faced with the Dip,
most people suck it up and try to average their way to success.

Which is precisely why so few people end up as the best in the world.
To be a superstar, you must do something exceptional. Not just survive the
Dip, but use the Dip as an opportunity to create something so extraordinary that
people can’t help but talk about it, recommend it, and, yes, choose it. 
The next time you catch yourself being average when you feel like quitting,
realize that you have only two good choices: Quit or be exceptional. Average is
for losers.
Am I being too harsh? Isn’t your time and your effort and your career and
your reputation too valuable to squander on just being average? Average feels
safe, but it’s not. It’s invisible. It’s the last choice—the path of least resistance.
The temptation to be average is just another kind of quitting…the kind to be
avoided. You deserve better than average.

Serial Quitters Spend a Lot of Time in Line
Observing the supermarket over the years, I’ve determined that there are three
common checkout strategies. My local supermarket may be like yours—it
usually has four or five checkouts open. If you watch carefully, you’ll see people
adopting one of three strategies:

The first is to pick the shortest line and get in it. Stick with it, no matter

what.

The second is to pick the shortest line and switch lines once (at a maximum)
if something holds up your line—like the clueless person with a check but no
check-cashing card. But that’s it, just one switch.
The third is to pick the shortest line and keep scanning the other lines.
Switch lines if a shorter one appears. Continue this process until you leave the
store.

The problem with the third strategy is obvious. Every time you switch lines,
you’re starting over. In your search for a quick fix, you almost certainly waste
time and you definitely waste energy jumping back and forth.
There are queues everywhere. Do you know an entrepreneur-wannabe who
is on his sixth or twelfth new project? He jumps from one to another, and every
time he hits an obstacle, he switches to a new, easier, better opportunity. And
while he’s a seeker, he’s never going to get anywhere. 
He never gets anywhere because he’s always switching lines, never able to
really run for it. While starting up is thrilling, it’s not until you get through the
Dip that your efforts pay off. Countless entrepreneurs have perfected the starting
part, but give up long before they finish paying their dues. The sad news is that
when you start over, you get very little credit for how long you stood in line with
your last great venture.

This malady doesn’t afflict just entrepreneurs. Advertisers who are always
jumping from one agency to another, or one medium to another, end up wasting
a fortune. If it takes ten impressions to make an impact, and you’ve delivered
eight, that switch is going to cost you a lot of time and money.

Salespeople Who Quit
A well-reported study (probably apocryphal) found that the typical salesperson
gives up after the fifth contact with a prospect. After five times, the salesperson
figures she’s wasting her time and the prospect’s, quits, and moves on.

Of course, the study reports that 80 percent of these customers buy on the

seventh attempt to close the sale. If only the salesperson had stuck it out!
Is it true that people need to be closed constantly, that seven is a magic
number, and that the key to selling is to be aggressive? I don’t think so. I don’t
think the best salespeople are the ones who are always in your face, always
asking for the order, always pushing.
I think the lesson of the story is this: Selling is about a transference of
emotion, not a presentation of facts. If it were just a presentation of facts, then a
PDF flyer or a Web site would be sufficient to make the phone ring.
Prospects (that’s you if you’ve ever been sold something) are experts at
sensing what’s on the salesperson’s mind. People have honed their salesperson
radar—we’re really good at detecting sincerity (or the lack of it). If a
salesperson’s attitude is “Hey, if this person doesn’t buy, there’s someone right
down the street I can call on,” what’s projected is “Hey, I’m not that serious
about you having this product.” On the other hand, if a salesperson is there for
the long run, committed to making a sale because it benefits the other person,
that signal is sent loud and clear. 
Please understand this: If you’re not able to get through the Dip in an
exceptional way, you must quit. And quit right now. Because if your order book
is 80 percent filled with prospects where you just sort of show up, you’re not
only wasting your time, you’re also stealing your energy from the 20 percent of
the calls where you have a chance to create a breakthrough.
Once again, getting through the Dip is a valid strategy. It isn’t a good
strategy because successful salespeople are annoying—no, sticking through the
Dip is a great strategy because it changes the entire dynamic of the salesperson’s
day. It is not a moral choice. It’s a strategic one. “I’m getting through this Dip
with you because it’s important to both of us” is the very best signal to send.

Facing the Dip
You may be sure that your product is the best in the world, but no one outside a
tiny group cares at all. You’re busy pushing your new idea wherever it can go.
Meanwhile, most consumers could care less about your idea or those fancy high-
heeled shoes or some cutting-edge type of glue. Instead, they wait. They wait for
something to be standardized, tested, inexpensive, and ready for prime time.
Hence the Dip of market acceptance. The marketers who get rewarded are
the ones who don’t quit. They hunker down through the Dip and galvanize and
insulate and perfect their product while others keep looking for yet another quick
hit.

So while one publisher runs from author to author looking for an instant best
seller, another nurtures Dr. Seuss or Stephen King as he slowly builds an
audience. While one nonprofit runs from grant maker to grant maker seeking
funds for this project or that one, a successful nonprofit sticks with a consistent
theme, showing up, paying its dues, focusing on just a few foundations until the
money comes through.

Gorilla Glue made it through the Dip. So did Jimmy Choo and the Swatch.

Not overnight, but bit by bit, until they reached a critical mass.

Job seekers face the Dip because human resources departments support it.
HR doesn’t show up at your door and offer you a job. They set hurdles (like
submitting a résumé or wearing a suit or flying to Cleveland) as a way of
screening out the folks who aren’t actually serious about a job. 
We’re seduced by the tales of actresses being discovered at the local
drugstore, or a classmate who got a fantastic job just by showing up at the
college placement office. We see an author hit the big time after just one
appearance on Oprah or a rock band getting signed after submitting a demo—it
all seems easy and exciting.
It’s easy to be seduced by the new money and the rush to the fresh. The
problem is that this leads to both an addiction and a very short attention span. If
it doesn’t work today, the thinking goes, why should I wait around until
tomorrow? The problem is that only a tiny portion of the audience is looking for
the brand-new thing. Most people are waiting for the tested, the authenticated,
and the proven.
Very quietly, the Microsofts of the world hang in, going from version 1 to
version 2, knowing that by version 3, the world will be a different (and better)
place for them. Microsoft failed twice with Windows, four times with Word,
three times with Excel. The entire company is based on the idea of slogging
through the Dip, relentlessly changing tactics but never quitting the big idea.

What Business Are You In?
Yes, you should (you must) quit a product or a feature or a design—you need to
do it regularly if you’re going to grow and have the resources to invest in the
right businesses. But no, you mustn’t quit a market or a strategy or a niche. The
businesses we think of as overnight successes weren’t. We just didn’t notice
them until they were well baked. 
Procter & Gamble has killed hundreds of products. Starbucks killed their
music-CD–burning stations. Social Security reform has been dropped a dozen
times. Don’t fall in love with a tactic and defend it forever. Instead, decide once
and for all whether you’re in a market or not. And if you are, get through that
Dip.
The market wants to see you persist. It demands a signal from you that
you’re serious, powerful, accepted, and safe. The bulk of the market, any market,
is made up of those folks in the middle of the bell curve, the ones who want to
buy something proven and valued.
Following a product all the way through the Dip works because you’re
reaching an ever larger part of the market. If your product isn’t working, if your
service isn’t catching on, if you’re not even appealing to the crazy geeks who
like the new stuff, you mustn’t persist with a tactic just because you feel stuck
with it. Your strategy—to be a trusted source in your chosen market—can
survive even if your product is canceled.

The Opposite of Quitting Isn’t “Waiting Around”
No, the opposite of quitting is rededication. The opposite of quitting is an
invigorated new strategy designed to break the problem apart.
It’s a mistake to view the Dip as static, to imagine that you are merely a
passive passenger on a slow-moving boat ride, sitting there as you move through
the doldrums of the Dip.

The Dip is flexible. It responds to the effort you put into it. In fact, it’s quite
likely (in almost every case) that aggressive action on your part can make the
Dip a lot worse. Or a lot better. Let’s try for better.
When the pain gets so bad that you’re ready to quit, you’ve set yourself up
as someone with nothing to lose. And someone with nothing to lose has quite a
bit of power. You can go for broke. Challenge authority. Attempt unattempted
alternatives. Lean into a problem; lean so far that you might just lean right
through it.
David found himself stuck in a dead-end job at the end of a long career at
one company, and he was ready to quit. His boss was a disaster, the work wasn’t 
adding any value to his résumé or his day, and he was unhappy. David went for
broke. He had a meeting with his boss and his boss’s boss (quite a no-no) and
calmly explained his problem. He said that he figured he’d end up quitting, but
he liked the company so much he wanted to propose an alternative. So he did.

He walked out with a major promotion, a brand-new challenge, and a new

boss.
If he had covered his downside, worried about the short term, and not been
prepared to quit that very day, it never would have happened. He wasn’t bluffing.
He really was ready either to quit or to lean into this new job, to rededicate
himself to the company and make something happen.
Quitting in the Dip Is Usually
a Short-term Decision—and a Bad One
When people quit, they are often focused on the short-term benefits. In other
words, “If it hurts; stop!”

When Joe Biden quit the race for president in 1988, it was over an issue that
seems incredibly trivial today—he didn’t give proper attribution to a quote in a
speech. But at that moment, the pain was overwhelming, and Biden and his
advisers couldn’t see a way from here to there. So they quit. Eighteen years later,
Biden is talking about running again. What a shame. If he had realized in 1988
that he was in a situation where he had nothing to lose, he could have radically
changed the conversation around the campaign. If he had changed the Dip, by
forcing his way through it, he’d have had a chance to leave his opponents
behind.
When a kid drops out of football or karate, it’s not because she’s carefully
considered the long-term consequences of her action. She does it because her
coach keeps yelling at her, and it’s not fun. It’s better to stop.

Short-term pain has more impact on most people than long-term benefits do,
which is why it’s so important for you to amplify the long-term benefits of not
quitting. You need to remind yourself of life at the other end of the Dip because
it’s easier to overcome the pain of yet another unsuccessful cold call if the reality
of a successful sales career is more concrete. 

It’s easier to stick out a lousy class in college if you can picture graduation
day. Even more vivid is the power of keeping score. If you can track your Alexa
rank online or your class rank or your market share or your spot in the sales-
team pecking order, working your way up to number one is daily feedback that
helps you deal with the short-term hassles.

No One Quits the Boston Marathon at Mile 25
It’s not hard to imagine what the drop-out curve for the marathon looks like.
Probably something like this:

Who, after all, is going to drop out when the finish line is in sight?

Persistent people are able to visualize the idea of light at the end of the
tunnel when others can’t see it. At the same time, the smartest people are
realistic about not imagining light when there isn’t any.
If you work at a big city newspaper, you can see that there’s no light at the
end of that career-choice tunnel. Circulation is dropping, and it’s going to drop
ever faster. Most papers have little chance of replacing their traditional business
with an online alternative. As a result, every day at most papers is going to be
just a little bit worse than the day before. Every day you stay is a bad strategic
decision for your career because every day you get better at something that isn’t
that useful—and you are another day behind others who are learning something
more useful. The only reason to stay is the short-term pain associated with 
quitting. Winners understand that taking that pain now prevents a lot more pain
later.

The same applies to the strategic management of organizations. The decision
to quit or not is a simple evaluation: Is the pain of the Dip worth the benefit of
the light at the end of the tunnel? 

If You’re Not Going to Get to #1, You Might as Well Quit Now. 

QUIT!

It’s okay to quit, sometimes.

In fact, it’s okay to quit often.
You should quit if you’re on a dead-end path. You should quit if you’re
facing a Cliff. You should quit if the project you’re working on has a Dip that
isn’t worth the reward at the end. Quitting the projects that don’t go anywhere is
essential if you want to stick out the right ones. You don’t have the time or the
passion or the resources to be the best in the world at both.

Quitting a Tactic vs. Quitting a Strategy

Yes, I know it’s heretical, but I’m advocating quitting. Quitting often, in fact.

Not giving up and abandoning your long-term strategy (wherever you might
be using that strategy—a career, an income, a relationship, a sale) but quitting
the tactics that aren’t working.
Getting off a Cul-de-Sac is not a moral failing. It’s just smart. Seeing a Cliff
coming far in advance isn’t a sign of weakness. Instead, it represents real insight
and bravery. It frees up your energy for the Dip.

That Noise Inside Your Head

Right at this moment, my clairvoyance tells me you’re having a conversation
 
that involves a lot of rationalization. You’re explaining to yourself why those
Cul-de-Sacs you’re in aren’t really dead ends (they are). You’re busy defending
the mediocre work your organization does because it’s the best you can do under
the circumstances (it’s not). You don’t want to quit. It’s not fun. It’s not easy. So
you haven’t. But you should. You must!

Or, you could just settle for being average.

Quitting as an Intelligent Strategy
Doug just got another promotion. He works for a software company in Indiana,
and, over the last fourteen years, he’s had a wide range of jobs. For the first
seven or eight years, Doug was in business development and sales. He handled
the Microsoft account for a while, flying to Redmond, Washington, every six
weeks or so. It was hard on his family, but he’s really focused—and really good.
Two years ago, Doug got a huge promotion. He was put in charge of his
entire division—150 people, the second-biggest group in the company. Doug
attacked the job with relish. In addition to spending even more time on the road,
he did a great job of handling internal management issues.

A month ago, for a variety of good reasons, Doug got a sideways promotion.
Same level, but a new team of analysts report to him. Now he’s in charge of
strategic alliances. He’s well respected, he’s done just about every job, and he
makes a lot of money.

Imagine the conversation you could have with him. “You’ve been there a 

long time, my friend.”
Doug won’t buy it: “Yes, I’ve been here fourteen years, but I’ve had seven
jobs. When I got here, we were a startup, but now we’re a division of Cisco. I’ve
got new challenges, and the commute is great…”

Go on, interrupt him.
Doug needs to leave for a very simple reason. He’s been branded. Everyone
at the company has an expectation of who Doug is and what he can do. Working
your way up from the mail room sounds sexy; but, in fact, it’s entirely unlikely.
Doug has hit a plateau. He’s not going to be challenged, pushed, or promoted to
president. Doug, regardless of what he could actually accomplish, has stopped
evolving—at least in the eyes of the people who matter.
If he leaves and joins another company, he gets to reinvent himself. No one
in the new company will remember young Doug from ten years ago. No, they’ll
treat Doug as the new Doug, the Doug with an endless upside and little past.
Our parents and grandparents believed you should stay at a job for five
years, ten years, or even your whole life. But in a world where companies come
and go—where they grow from nothing to the Fortune 500 and then disappear,
all in a few years—that’s just not possible.

Here’s the deal, and here’s what I told Doug: The time to look for a new job
is when you don’t need one. The time to switch jobs is before it feels
comfortable. Go. Switch. Challenge yourself; get yourself a raise and a
promotion. You owe it to your career and your skills.

If your job is a Cul-de-Sac, you have to quit or accept the fact that your

career is over.

Quitting Is Not the Same as Failing
Strategic quitting is a conscious decision you make based on the choices that are
available to you. If you realize you’re at a dead end compared with what you
could be investing in, quitting is not only a reasonable choice, it’s a smart one.

Failing, on the other hand, means that your dream is over. Failing happens 
when you give up, when there are no other options, or when you quit so often
that you’ve used up all your time and resources.

It’s easy to wring your hands about becoming a failure. Quitting smart,

though, is a great way to avoid failing.

Coping Is a Lousy Alternative to Quitting
Coping is what people do when they try to muddle through. They cope with a
bad job or a difficult task. The problem with coping is that it never leads to
exceptional performance. Mediocre work is rarely because of a lack of talent and
often because of the Cul-de-Sac. All coping does is waste your time and
misdirect your energy. If the best you can do is cope, you’re better off quitting.

Quitting is better than coping because quitting frees you up to excel at

something else.

“Never Quit”
What a spectacularly bad piece of advice. It ranks up there with “Oh, that’s a
funny dirty joke, let’s tell the teacher!” Never quit? Never quit wetting your bed?
Or that job you had at Burger King in high school? Never quit selling a product
that is now obsolete?

Wait a minute. Didn’t that coach say quitting was a bad idea?

Actually, quitting as a short-term strategy is a bad idea. Quitting for the long

term is an excellent idea.

I think the advice-giver meant to say, “Never quit something with great long-
term potential just because you can’t deal with the stress of the moment.” Now
that’s good advice.

Pride Is the Enemy of the Smart Quitter
Richard Nixon sacrificed tens of thousands of innocent lives (on both sides)
when he refused to quit the Vietnam war. The only reason he didn’t quit sooner:
pride. The very same pride that keeps someone in the same career years after it 
has become unattractive and no fun. The very same pride that keeps a restaurant
open long after it’s clear that business is just not going to pick up.

When you’re facing a Cul-de-Sac, what’s your reason for sticking? Are you

too proud to quit?

One reason people feel really good after they quit a dead-end project is that
they discover that hurting one’s pride is not fatal. You work up the courage to
quit, bracing yourself for the sound of your ego being ripped to shreds—and then
everything is okay.

If pride is the only thing keeping you from quitting, if there’s no Dip to get
through, you’re likely wasting an enormous amount of time and money
defending something that will heal pretty quickly.

Harvard Medical School Is Not a Reason to Stick (Ignore Sunk Costs!)
Best-selling author Michael Crichton quit as he was on his way to a career at the
top of his profession. When he gave up medicine, Crichton had already
graduated from Harvard Medical School and done a postdoctoral fellowship
study at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, guaranteeing him a lucrative
career as a doctor or as a researcher. He traded it for the unpredictable life of an
author.
Crichton had no stomach for cutting people open, and he decided he didn’t
relish the future a medical career would bring him, regardless of how successful
he might become at it. So he quit. Crichton saw that just because he had already
gotten into Harvard, already earned a fellowship—already made it through the
Dip—he didn’t have to spend the rest of his life doing something he didn’t enjoy
in order to preserve his pride.

He stopped cold turkey and started over. If he can quit, can you?

Three Questions to Ask Before Quitting
If you’re thinking about quitting (or not quitting), then you’ve succeeded. (And
so have I.) Realizing that quitting is worth your focus and consideration is the
first step to becoming the best in the world. The next step is to ask three
questions. 

QUESTION 1: AM I PANICKING?
Quitting is not the same as panicking. Panic is never premeditated. Panic attacks
us, it grabs us, it is in the moment.
Quitting when you’re panicked is dangerous and expensive. The best
quitters, as we’ve seen, are the ones who decide in advance when they’re going
to quit. You can always quit later—so wait until you’re done panicking to
decide.

When the pressure is greatest to compromise, to drop out, or to settle, your
desire to quit should be at its lowest. The decision to quit is often made in the
moment. But that’s exactly the wrong time to make such a critical decision. The
reason so many of us quit in the Dip is that without a compass or a plan, the
easiest thing to do is to give up. While that might be the easiest path, it’s also the
least successful one.

QUESTION 2: WHO AM I TRYING TO INFLUENCE?

Are you trying to succeed in a market? Get a job? Train a muscle?
If you’re considering quitting, it’s almost certainly because you’re not being
successful at your current attempt at influence. If you have called on a prospect a
dozen times without success, you’re frustrated and considering giving up. If
you’ve got a boss who just won’t let up, you’re considering quitting your job.
And if you’re a marketer with a product that doesn’t seem to be catching on,
you’re wondering if you should abandon this product and try another.
If you’re trying to influence just one person, persistence has its limits. It’s
easy to cross the line between demonstrating your commitment and being a pest.
If you haven’t influenced him yet, it may very well be time to quit.
One person or organization will behave differently than a market of people
will. One person has a particular agenda and a single worldview. One person will
make up his mind and if you’re going to succeed, you’ll have to change it. And
changing someone’s mind is difficult, if not impossible.
If you’re trying to influence a market, though, the rules are different. Sure,
some of the people in a market have considered you (and even rejected you). But 
most of the people in the market have never even heard of you. The market
doesn’t have just one mind. Different people in the market are seeking different
things.
Sergey Brin, cofounder of Google, told me, “We knew that Google was
going to get better every single day as we worked on it, and we knew that sooner
or later, everyone was going to try it. So our feeling was that the later you tried
it, the better it was for us because we’d make a better impression with better
technology. So we were never in a big hurry to get you to use it today. Tomorrow
would be better.”

Influencing one person is like scaling a wall. If you get over the wall the first
few tries, you’re in. If you don’t, often you’ll find that the wall gets higher with
each attempt.

Influencing a market, on the other hand, is more of a hill than a wall. You
can make progress, one step at a time, and as you get higher, it actually gets
easier. People in the market talk to each other. They are influenced by each other.
So every step of progress you make actually gets amplified.
QUESTION 3: WHAT SORT OF MEASURABLE PROGRESS AM I
MAKING?
If you’re trying to succeed in a job or a relationship or at a task, you’re either
moving forward, falling behind, or standing still. There are only three choices.
To succeed, to get to that light at the end of the tunnel, you’ve got to make
some sort of forward progress, no matter how small. Too often, we get stuck in a
situation where quitting seems too painful, so we just stay with it, choosing not
to quit because it’s easier than quitting. That choice—to stick with it in the
absence of forward progress—is a waste. It’s a waste because of the opportunity
cost—you could be doing something far better, and far more pleasurable, with
your time.
Measurable progress doesn’t have to be a raise or a promotion. It can be
more subtle than that, but it needs to be more than a mantra, more than just
“surviving is succeeding.” The challenge, then, is to surface new milestones in
areas where you have previously expected to find none. 
If you’ve got a small business and you are keeping a few customers happy,
it’s fine to keep on keeping on because, over time, those customers can get you
new customers. You can measure your progress by referrals and sales growth.
Your consistency and market presence, all by themselves, are enough to justify
your efforts (sometimes). If, on the other hand, your business doesn’t generate
word of mouth, doesn’t see new customers, and isn’t moving forward, why
exactly are you sticking with it?

When you are trying to influence an entire market, the value of not quitting
is quite high. Yes, you should probably be eager to quit a marketing tactic that
isn’t paying for itself, or even a particular product feature that isn’t appealing to
your target audience. But your commitment to the market needs to be
unquestioned—it’s much cheaper and easier to build your foundation in one
market than to flit from one to another until you find a quick success.

Let’s slow down and think that through for a second. Quitting a job is not
quitting your quest to make a living or a difference or an impact. Quitting a job
doesn’t have to mean giving up. A job is just a tactic, a way to get to what you
really want. As soon as your job hits a dead end, it makes sense to quit and take
your quest to a bigger marketplace—because every day you wait puts your goal
further away.
The same is true for an organization. You don’t define yourself by the tactics
you use. Instead, your organization succeeds or fails in its efforts to reach its big
goals. And the moment your tactics are no longer part of winning the Dip—the
moment they are in a Cul-de-Sac—you are obligated to switch tactics at the
same time you most definitely keep aiming for the bigger goal.
The seduction of not quitting—and the source of all those stories about
sticking it out—almost always comes from people moving through a market.
When you hear about an author who got turned down thirty times before signing
with a publisher or of an overnight sensation who paid her dues for a decade in
coffee shops, you’re seeing how persistence pays off across a market.
On the other hand, when was the last time you heard about someone who
stuck with a dead-end job or a dead-end relationship or a dead-end sales prospect
until suddenly, one day, the person at the other end said, “Wow, I really admire
your persistence; let’s change our relationship for the better”? It doesn’t happen. 

Quitting Before You Start
Here’s an assignment for you: Write it down. Write down under what
circumstances you’re willing to quit. And when. And then stick with it.

Deciding in Advance When to Quit

Here’s a quote from ultramarathoner Dick Collins:
Decide before the race the conditions that will cause you to stop and
drop out. You don’t want to be out there saying, “Well gee, my leg hurts,
I’m a little dehydrated, I’m sleepy, I’m tired, and it’s cold and windy.”
And talk yourself into quitting. If you are making a decision based on
how you feel at that moment, you will probably make the wrong
decision.

So, there’s tool number one. If quitting is going to be a strategic decision that
enables you to make smart choices in the marketplace, then you should outline
your quitting strategy before the discomfort sets in.
Just as a smart venture capitalist pressures the board of directors to have a
plan in case they run out of money, every individual and every organization that
wants to use quitting as a competitive tool ought to have a plan about when it’s
time to quit.
If quitting in the face of the Dip is a bad idea, then quitting when you’re
facing a Cul-de-Sac is a great idea. The hard part is having the perspective to see
this when you’re in pain, or frustrated, or stuck. That’s why setting your limits
before you start is so powerful.

Soft Tires…Pick Your Dip

Consider the bicycle tire.

The first ten pounds of pressure you put into a completely flat tire do no
good at all. And adding ten extra pounds to a full tire will burst the tire,
defeating the entire purpose of your effort. No, it’s just the last ten pounds, the
ones that get it to full that really pay off. 
When it’s down five or ten pounds, it might as well be flat. A 10-percent
change in pressure makes it defective. If it’s up five or ten pounds, though, the
entire wheel is threatened with a blowout. Obviously, it’s the pressure right
around full that has the most impact.

If you enter a market that’s too big or too loud for the amount of resources
you have available, your message is going to get lost. Your marketing
disappears, your message fails to spread. Think twice before launching a mass-
market brand of chewing gum. Like adding just a few pounds of air to a flat tire,
launching a product into too big of a market has little effect. You can’t create
pressure and you never reach the Dip.
When Sara Lee tried to enter the market for home coffee machines and pods
with their Senseo coffeemaker, they didn’t have enough resources to get through
the Dip…not in the United States, anyway.

In the Netherlands, a much smaller market, Senseo has reached a 40-percent
market share of all households. They have the right amount of pressure for the
“tire” that is that (tiny) market. In the United States, on the other hand, they
report that only 1 percent of households have a Senseo. Too big a market, too
few resources. Stuck in the Dip.
Since few Americans have a Senseo, few talk about it. Few stores promote
the pods. The word doesn’t spread and Senseo can’t reach critical mass—there
are too many places for the message to go and not enough resources to get it
there.

Figure out how much pressure you’ve got available, then pick your tire. Not

too big, not too small.

You’re Astonishing

How dare you waste it.
You and your organization have the power to change everything. To create
remarkable products and services. To over deliver. To be the best in the world.

How dare you squander that resource by spreading it too thin. 

How dare you settle for mediocre just because you’re busy coping with too

many things on your agenda, racing against the clock to get it all done.
The lesson is simple: If you’ve got as much as you’ve got, use it. Use it to
become the best in the world, to change the game, to set the agenda for everyone
else. You can only do that by marshaling all of your resources to get through the
biggest possible Dip. In order to get through that Dip, you’ll need to quit
everything else. If it’s not going to put a dent in the world, quit. Right now. Quit
and use that void to find the energy to assault the Dip that matters.

Go ahead, make something happen. We’re waiting!

Questions

Is this a Dip, a Cliff, or a Cul-de-Sac?

If it’s a Cul-de-Sac, how can I change it into a Dip?

Is my persistence going to pay off in the long run?
Am I engaged with just one person (or organization), or do my actions in
this situation spill over into the entire marketplace?
When should I quit? I need to decide now, not when I’m in the middle of
it, and not when part of me is begging to quit.
If I quit this task, will it increase my ability to get through the Dip on
something more important?
If I’m going to quit anyway, is there something dramatic I can do instead
that might change the game?
Should I really be calling on IBM? Should I really be trying to get on
Oprah? 

What chance does this project have to be the best in the world?

Who decides what best is?

Can we make the world smaller?
Does it make sense to submit a résumé to every single ad on Craigslist,
just to see what happens?

If I like my job, is it time to quit?
Is doing nothing better than planning on quitting and then doing
something great?

Are you avoiding the remarkable as a way of quitting without quitting?

If it scares you, it might be a good thing to try. 

The Best in the World?
The best in the world? Sripraphai, Hard Manufacturing, Toyota Prius, JetBlue,
Gulfstream, Nordost, Kate’s Paperie, Peet’s, Silpat, Robin Dellabough,
Starbucks, iPod, Jackson Pollock, Allison Sweet, Paychex, Sotheby’s, Porsche,
Barry Diller, Megan Casey, Helene Godin, Paul Graham, Google, White Stripes,
Red Maxwell, Terry Gross, Tony Hawk, Heinz Ketchup, Shaun White, Catherine
E. Oliver, iStockphoto. com, Leica, Jonathan Sackner Bernstein, Lark, Chubb,
SmartGlove, Beckham, Madonna, Elvis, Boing Boing, the Three Stooges, Ben
Zander, Stephen King, Amazon.com, Hood River Gorge, Sundance, CBGB,
Paris (the city, not the person), Denny’s, Lisa DiMona, Johnny Cash, Mia
Hamm, Michael Jordan, Rolex, the Empire State Building, Hugh Macleod,
CAA, Will Weisser, Bob Dylan, Dilbert, Doonesbury, De Cecco pasta, FedEx,
Momofuku, Adrian Zackheim, The New Yorker, Burgerville, Coach, the Eiffel
Tower, Gil Hildebrand, Jr., Tesla Motors, Lynn Gordon, Corey Brown, Swan,
WD 40, Mo & Alex, Scharffen Berger, Anne Shepherd, Chestnut Canoe, Ideo,
Tom Demott, Poilane, Casablanca, Amoeba Records, Charlotte Okie, the 
Tattered Cover, Jennifer Young, Joseph Perez, Miles Davis, Crooked Brook, and
Marilyn Wishnie. 

Acknowledgments
This book is really short. Short books are hard to write, but you made me do it.
My readers are excellent correspondents, and this is something I’ve learned from
them along the way: Write less. 

It’s Almost Impossible to Overinvest in Becoming the Market Leader. 

All our successes are the same. All our failures, too.

We succeed when we do something remarkable.

We fail when we give up too soon.

We succeed when we are the best in the world at what we do.

We fail when we get distracted by tasks we don’t have the guts to quit.
 

Share the Dip
Who else is stuck? Make a list of co-workers who need to learn about
quitting and then circulate this book when you’re done. Add a few
names, then pass it on (cross yourself off the list before you do). 
If you’ve enjoyed The Dip, check out these other thought-provoking, bestselling
books by Seth Godin:
Small Is the New Big
All Marketers Are Liars
Free Prize Inside!
Purple Cow
Unleashing the Ideavirus
Permission Marketing
Visit www.SethGodin.com for more information…and click on Seth’s head to
read his blog.


 